---
section: public-order-safety
title: Illegal, Unnecessary and disproportionate?
---
In May 2001, after four years in office, Tony Blair called a national election. When announcing it for the following month, he sought a “mandate for fresh, radical change”. Little did he know that such radical change would be precipitated not by the New Labour manifesto, but by the international terrorist threat emerging from the Middle East and that would take place on Western soil.

Tony Blair’s first term as Prime Minister marked a change in law and order politics in the UK. The famous slogan that the Labour Party would be “tough on crime, tough on the causes of crime” put tackling social factors on an equal footing to the punishment of criminals in the public’s consciousness. In opposition, and especially in the 2001 election campaign, the Conservative Party led by William Hague, leapt on this as a potential political vulnerability – that the Labour Party was spending too much time and money on education and youth support, and not enough on keeping Britons safe. Throughout that first Labour Party term, crime was falling, but public fear had been roused. In the 2001 election campaign, the Labour Party duly responded that crime control would be a priority of its second term.

Four months later, and after the Labour Party had secured its second consecutive electoral landslide, the safety threats that stoked public fears would turn from domestic to international. 9/11 shocked the world, and gave rise to an era of terrorism and Western retaliation that have seen threats to the UK ever since. Notably in 2005, when again just weeks after a national election, Islamic terrorists killed 52 commuters in London during the morning rush hour.

In the context of an election campaign that convinced voters that the Labour Party were soft on crime, and with a real, deadly threat on their doorsteps, their response to the terrorist attacks was vociferous. In Tony Blair’s address at the Labour Party conference three weeks after 9/11, he said that Britain faced a choice with terrorism: “Defeat it, or be defeated by it”. In that same speech, he went on to say that “here in this country and in other nations round the world, laws will be changed, not to deny basic liberties but to prevent their abuse”. In the first nine years of the Labour government, over 3,000 new criminal offences were ushered in, almost one for every day that the Labour Party had been in power. Many were controversial. Section 44 of the Terrorism Act 2000 gave police the power to stop and search anyone in designated zones without the need for suspicion (the European Court of Human Rights later considered this illegal), and the Anti-social Behaviour Act 2003 led to the criminalisation and demonisation of a generation of teenagers and young adults. Arguably, civil liberties, and the relationship between state and citizens had been permanently damaged.
