---
section: outro
title: Open government and open dialogue is critical to resurrecting trust
---
Though it feels like a lifetime ago, we are just five years on from the onset of the pandemic, and only 18 months since the WHO declared the global health emergency over. Because of the lockdowns, economic and trade shutdowns, access to care and education limitations, the rise of remote working, changes in personal habits and a whole lot more, the legacy of the pandemic will continue to be felt for many years to come. But what was its impact on trust? Studies have shown that political events create wild fluctuations in levels of trust and distrust¹, but the overall trend is a decline of trust in politicians, business, the media, and even in each other. According to the 2024 Edelman Trust Barometer, trust in the UK fell 4 percentage points last year and is now ranked among the least trusting countries in the world². In a survey by the Office for National Statistics, in answer to the question: ‘On a scale of 0 to 10, where 0 is not at all and 10 is completely, how much do you trust Parliament (the House of Commons and the House of Lords)?’, the most common answer was ‘0’.

In this project, we have looked at several institutional privacy, security and surveillance policies and controversies mentioned by users of anti-lockdown and anti-vax Telegram channels. We have made the case that these events and controversies, and those like them, have built on the seeds of doubt of those who mis- and distrust. In many cases, it’s not just the event itself that has impacted trust, but related miscommunication, lack of transparency and accountability. What influences trust in politicians and in government is multifactorial and events and scandals are only one part of the picture. Trust in politicians and government is influenced by multiple factors, with events and scandals being only one part of the picture. A decline in trust could equally be attributed to people’s perceptions of societal fairness, equality of opportunity, or politicians' broken manifesto commitments. However, this project attempts to dispel the myth that it’s only those on the fringe of society that hold distrustful opinions of our institutions. There is a danger that the majority of the population’s healthy mistrust topples over into cynicism if our institutions don’t take these events and the public response to them more seriously.

The idea for this project came to us when then-Prime Minister, Boris Johnson, labelled anti-vaxxers ‘nuts’, while, at the same time, the French President Emmanuel Macron said that he wanted to ‘piss off’ unvaccinated people. These insensitive responses in political discourse effectively condemn those who hold such opinions as irredeemable. Politicians should be aware that a great number of those who chose not to get vaccinated were doing so for a whole host of reasons beyond the safety and efficacy of vaccines. A 2022 published study surveyed, amongst other things, why people chose not to get vaccinated. The most common response was ‘No reason/Don’t know’³. Various biases influence these kinds of decisions, and this project supports the interpretation that disinformation is not usually convincing on its own but rather reinforces existing beliefs or suspicions.

This project has framed faltering public opinions of government and public institutions as messages that they could do better⁴, and that politicians and the institutions they represent should write off those who mistrust them at their own peril. If they do, the Donald Trumps of this world fill the void, the distrust spiral grows and the Internet's rabbit holes deepen.
