---
section: disproportionate-essay-end
title: " Title"
---
In the years since the Labour Party were unseated from government, the direction of travel for new monitoring and surveillance tools are largely digital. Police and intelligence agencies have long had the power to trawl through anyone’s phone logs to see who they have called and for how long. This kind of information is termed ‘communications data’. In 2016, the Investigatory Powers Act updated that police power for the digital age. It gave police and intelligence agencies the opportunity to collect communications data from all internet connections, e.g. every website someone has visited. The logic being that an Internet communications data, which includes timestamps, URLs, IP addresses, data volume, email addresses and names associated to an account, usernames, passwords and location data, is equivalent to a phone log.

In 2021, the Investigatory Powers Commissioner’s Office revealed that they were undertaking a trial with two unnamed UK Internet Service Providers (ISPs) to collect all internet connection records for every customer. In May 2023, WIRED reported that the government deemed that trial “a success” and were working towards introducing this collection of data nationally¹, demanding every ISP to collect communications data from its customers for 12 months, which would then be accessible to police and intelligence agencies once a warrant has been obtained.

The introduction to this section listed the many issues that have been proposed as solvable by the introduction of identity cards. The latest in that iteration is online identity. Similar to not requiring your passport to access a nightclub, the government claims that digital IDs can solve the problem of identifying yourself when interacting with an age-based website, or to access government websites, consumer sites or online banking. It can even hold “other information about you, like your address, or biometric information, like a fingerprint or face scan². The UK’s digital policies have given consecutive governments the reputation that they are prioritising “innovation and business over safeguarding people’s rights”³. 

As new technologies like end-to-end encryption and blockchain promise greater anonymity in our interactions online, many consider the UK government to be moving in the opposite direction, including the inventor of the Internet, Tim Berners-Lee, who labelled the Investigatory Powers Bill “undemocratic”. In an open letter in 2017, he wrote that “through collaboration with – or coercion of – companies, governments are also increasingly watching our every move online, and passing extreme laws that trample on our rights to privacy”.
