---
section: section-thirteen
title: The human cost of a data breach
---
In October 2020, Hackney Council’s IT team observed outages in their IT systems and it was obvious that it wasn’t some kind of server blowout or failing code. The ransomware group, Mespinoza, also known as PYSA (Protect Your Systems, Amigo), had breached Hackney Council’s servers most likely because an employee clicked a link in a phishing email. It devastated their systems and the council services had come to a standstill, forcing staff to turn to pen and paper. From speaking to Hackney residents in 2023, it was clear that even two and half years later, it hadn’t fully recovered. While Hackney council hasn’t released details about the negotiations with the group or for how much they were held to ransom, we do know from an inspection of the Council’s accounts that they have spent over £12 million on recovery and replacing systems since the attack¹.

The financial cost of an attack to a company or public institution is substantial, but it’s often hard to count the human cost. When personal information is lost via a ransomware attack, companies often pay the ransom because of the loss of reputation that comes with losing information, but also because of the chance of identity theft of its customers or users. While identity theft remains a serious threat and has serious consequences for anyone who has suffered that fate, often nothing comes of data being shared on the dark web, instead it’s only the fear of the repercussions that hang over people’s heads. But when a public body like a local council is affected, so are the services that residents rely upon. For some of the 280,000 people living in Hackney borough, this meant not receiving benefits payments, racking up debts because they weren’t able to make rent and council tax payments, not being processed for housing, or losing large sums of money because house purchases fell through due to the inaccessibility of the local land register².

Ransomware groups use their skills for illicit, monetary gain, and it’s a lucrative business. In 2023, ransomware groups collected over $1 billion from ransoms³, and while governments are cracking down on ransom payments, it remains a path to a quick fortune. For many groups, there is also ideological motivation. On the dark web on ransomware groups’ websites, there is a thread of anti-capitalism that runs through their statements. It’s hard to say if that is only self-justification for their ill-gotten gains, but there is a sentiment here that companies make so much money from people that the ‘robin hood’ ransomware groups are pickpocketing companies in retaliation.

In comparison to many targets of ransomware attacks, where ransoms in the tens of millions are often demanded, and sometimes paid⁴, when attacking publicly-funded institutions they can expect only a fraction of that kind of demand. This is largely because ransomware groups know that public offices don’t have that kind of cash lying around. So why attack local government or a publicly-funded institution when bigger spoils are to be had? Disrupting public services is hardly the act of a vigilante anticapitalist. As security reporter for WIRED, Lily Hay Newman highlights, mediocre ransomware groups target mediocre cyber defences⁵. Hackney Council, or the many UK schools targeted by the ransomware group, Vice Society, are easy targets that haven’t historically taken their cyber defences seriously, and while PYSA have been described as “very amateurish”⁶ in their own right, it’s still easy pickings.

Equally important for ransomware groups who would prefer to play the long game is that attacking local councils doesn’t get the same national or global attention than if the group targeted a large corporation or national body. The ransomware group, Hive found this out last year when their high profile attacks motivated the FBI to infiltrate their network⁷. Ransomware groups consider some publicly-funded institutions as weak and incompetent, and when people who use their services aren’t protected from these kinds of attacks, the public agree.
